Domain separation discussion in Security Considerations (#264)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve: draft-irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve.md

The expand\_message variants in this document ({{hashtofield-expand}})
always append a suffix-free-encoded domain separation tag DST\_prime
to the strings hashed by H, the underlying hash or extensible output function.
For protocols that also invoke H outside of hash\_to\_field, those invocations
MUST be domain separated from all uses of H inside hash\_to\_field, and SHOULD
be domain separated from uses of H outside of the protocol.

The RECOMMENDED method of ensuring domain separation is appending a tag
distinct from DST\_prime to all inputs to H outside of hash\_to\_field.
This ensures that distinct invocations of H have distinct suffixes.
If further separation is required among invocations of H outside of
hash\_to\_field, protocols should use multiple tags that are
all distinct from one another and from DST\_prime.

For protocols that use expand\_message\_xmd ({{hashtofield-expand-xmd}}),
either of the following two methods MAY be used instead.
The first method MAY also be used with expand\_message\_xof
({{hashtofield-expand-xof}}), but the second method MUST NOT be
used with expand\_message\_xof.

> 1. For each invocation of H outside hash\_to\_field, choose a unique domain
>    separation tag DST\_ext.
>    Prepend DST\_ext to the input to H, and in addition append a single
>    zero byte to this input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. For each use of H outside hash\_to\_field, choose a unique domain
   separation tag DST\_ext. Augment each invocation of H with input msg by
   computing H(DST\_ext || msg || I2OSP(0, 1)).
```

   Appending the byte I2OSP(0, 1) to all inputs to H outside hash\_to\_field
   ensures that these inputs are distinct from those inside hash\_to\_field
   because the final byte of DST\_prime encodes the length of DST, which is

>    required to be nonzero ({{domain-separation}}), and DST\_prime is always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   required to be nonzero ({{domain-separation}}, requirement 2), and DST\_prime is always
```

   appended to invocations of H inside hash\_to\_field.
   Further, distinct DST\_ext values ensure that invocations of H outside
   hash\_to\_field are distinct from one another.

>    For example, for two invocations of H whose inputs are msg1 and msg2,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, for two uses of H whose inputs are msg1 and msg2,
```

Reviewer: To me, an invocation is a single call to H, e.g., H(msg), whereas (as I understand it) what we mean here is that we want to clone H twice using DST_ext1 and DST_ext2.

   one might choose distinct DST\_ext1 and DST\_ext2 and compute

        hash1 = H(DST_ext1 || msg1 || I2OSP(0, 1))
        hash2 = H(DST_ext2 || msg2 || I2OSP(0, 1))

2. (Note: this method MUST NOT be used with expand\_message\_xof.)
   For each invocation of H outside expand\_message\_xmd, choose a unique domain
   separation tag DST\_ext.
   DST\_ext MUST be at least b bits long, where b is the number of bits output
   by the hash function H, and it MUST contain at least one nonzero bit among
   the first b bits.
   Prepend the value DST\_ext to the input to H.

   Since DST\_ext contains at least one nonzero bit among its first b bits,
   it is guaranteed to be distinct from the value Z\_pad
   ({{hashtofield-expand-xmd}}, step 4), which ensures that all inputs to H
   are distinct from the input used to generate b\_0 in expand\_message\_xmd.
   Moreover, since DST\_ext is at least b bits long, it is almost certainly
   distinct from the values b\_0 and strxor(b\_0, b\_(i - 1)), and therefore
   all inputs to H are distinct from the inputs used to generate b\_i, i >= 1,
   with high probability.

>    For example, for two invocations of H whose inputs are msg1 and msg2,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For example, for two uses of H whose inputs are msg1 and msg2,
```

   one might choose distinct nonzero DST\_ext1 and DST\_ext2 of length
   b bits each and compute

        hash1 = H(DST_ext1 || msg1)
        hash2 = H(DST_ext2 || msg2)

Other expand\_message variants that follow the guidelines in

> {{hashtofield-expand-other}} are expected to have similar properties,
> but these should be analyzed on a case-by-case basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{hashtofield-expand-other}} are expected to have similar properties.
However, these should be analyzed on a case-by-case basis.
```

In addition to the above considerations, protocols that use Merkle-Damgaard
hash functions as random oracles should be extremely careful to defend
against length extension and other well known attacks.

> expand\_message\_xmd is designed to guard against these attacks.
> It can be used as a random oracle outside of hash\_to\_field, and
> can be domain separated from invocations inside hash\_to\_field simply
> by choosing a different DST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expand\_message\_xmd guards against these attacks.
Applications can use it as a random oracle outside of hash\_to\_field
with proper domain separation from invocations inside hash\_to\_field
by choosing a different DST.
```

> Another possibility is to use HMAC {{RFC2104}}.

Reviewer: This is another possibility to use expand_message_xmd outside of hash_to_field? I'm not sure I follow this example. The above paragraph says, as I understand it, "feel free to crib expand_message_xmd for your purposes so long as you apply domain separation with a separate tag." It's not clear to me how this example follows. Can you clarify?

Author: Ah, yes, sorry. What I meant was, an alternative to using expand_msg_xmd is to use HMAC. And then the idea is, this is how you'd domain separate HMAC from expand_message_xmd. I will clarify

Author: OK, I took a crack at clarifying. Does this make sense now?

The reason I want to include "how to domain separate HMAC from expand_message_xmd" is that I suspect this might be something that protocols will want to do.

Author: Did some further simplification.

Reviewer: Yep! All good now.

    DST_ext_prime = HMAC(0, "HMAC-DERIVE-DST-" || DST_ext)
    random_oracle_output = HMAC(DST_ext_prime, random_oracle_input)

This works because with overwhelming probability the inputs to H inside
of HMAC with key DST\_ext\_prime do not equal Z\_pad, b\_0, or
strxor(b\_0, b\_(i - 1)).

{{CDMP05}} studies issues with using Merkle-Damgaard hash functions as
random oracles in detail.
Further discussion is beyond the scope of this document.

## Target security levels {#security-considerations-targets}

Each ciphersuite specifies a target security level (in bits) for the underlying
curve. This parameter ensures the corresponding hash\_to\_field instantiation is
conservative and correct. We stress that this parameter is only an upper bound on
the security level of the curve, and is neither a guarantee nor endorsement of its
suitability for a given application. Mathematical and cryptographic advancements
may reduce the effective security level for any curve.

# Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Adam Langley for his detailed writeup of Elligator 2 with
Curve25519 {{L13}};
Dan Boneh, Christopher Patton, and Benjamin Lipp for educational discussions; and

> David Benjamin, Frank Denis, Sean Devlin, Justin Drake, Bjoern Haase, Mike Hamburg,

Reviewer: 👍

all distinct from one another and from DST\_prime.

The above method is not compatible with all uses of H.
For example, this method does not work with HMAC {{RFC2104}},
because there is no way to append a value to the input of
the outer call to H.
The following alternative methods MAY be used instead of the
recommended method given above.
We discuss the specific case of HMAC further below.

1. For each use of H outside hash\_to\_field, choose a unique domain
   separation tag DST\_ext. Augment each invocation of H on input msg by
   computing H(DST\_ext || msg || I2OSP(0, 1)).

   This ensures domain separation as follows.
   First, appending the byte I2OSP(0, 1) to all inputs to H outside hash\_to\_field
   ensures that these inputs are distinct from those inside hash\_to\_field
   because the final byte of DST\_prime encodes the length of DST, which is
   required to be nonzero ({{domain-separation}}, requirement 2), and DST\_prime
   is always appended to invocations of H inside hash\_to\_field.
   Second, distinct DST\_ext values ensure that uses of H outside
   hash\_to\_field are domain separated from one another.

>    For example, for two uses of H whose inputs are msg1 and msg2,

Reviewer 2: I think you might want to say two hash functions H0, H1 created from H. So each hash function has different `DST_ext` prefix.

Otherwise, this makes me think that every time Alice wants to hash using say H0 (derived from H), she needs to append a different DST_ext (per message). Rather than a DST_ext that is the same for all invocations of H0.

Reviewer: Wouldn't those be identical? Namely, Alice could append the DST, or the implementation of H0 could do it internally, no?

Reviewer 2: The difference is whether the `DTS_ext` is different per message rather than per hash H0,H1,...

Reviewer: Sorry, I'm not following. How are these not identical? 

```
H0(msg) = H(msg || DST1) // Library appends and calls H directly
H1(msg) = H(msg || DST2) // ^^
```

and

```
H0(msg || DST1) = H(msg || DST1) // Alice appends and calls H directly
H1(msg || DST2) = H(msg || DST2) // ^^
```

Reviewer 2: This is not the point. 

> For example, for two uses of H whose inputs are msg1 and msg2, one might choose distinct DST\_ext1 and DST\_ext2 and compute
>
>        hash1 = H(DST_ext1 || msg1 || I2OSP(0, 1))
>        hash2 = H(DST_ext2 || msg2 || I2OSP(0, 1))

Every time Alice wants to hash with H0 defined as H0(msg) = H( DST_ex || msg ),  she must choose a different DST_ex. 

So, which one is the correct way?
H0(msg1) = H( DST_ex1 || msg1 )
H0(msg2) = H( DST_ex2 || msg2 )
H0(msg3) = H( DST_ex3 || msg3 )
or this one
H0(msg1) = H( DST_ex || msg1 )
H0(msg2) = H( DST_ex || msg2 )
H0(msg3) = H( DST_ex || msg3 )

I think the correct way is the second one, but the text it seems to me is saying the first one.

Reviewer: Ah, I see! Certainly the second one is the recommendation here. Maybe this clears it up?

```
hash1 = H1(msg) = H(DST_ext1 || msg || I2OSP(0, 1))
hash2 = H2(msg) = H(DST_ext2 || msg || I2OSP(0, 1))
```

Reviewer: @kwantam if this works for you, would you mind adding it? I'll merge when done!

Author: Great catch. I will clarify.

invocations of H, which reduces the likelihood that nonidealities in H
affect the distribution of the b\_i values.

We note that expand\_message\_xmd can be used to instantiate a general-purpose
indifferentiable functionality with variable-length output based on any hash
function meeting one of the above criteria.
Applications that use expand\_message\_xmd outside of hash\_to\_field should
ensure domain separation by picking a distinct value for DST.

## Domain separation recommendations {#security-considerations-domain-separation}

The expand\_message variants in this document ({{hashtofield-expand}})
always append a suffix-free-encoded domain separation tag DST\_prime
to the strings hashed by H, the underlying hash or extensible output function.
(Other expand\_message variants that follow the guidelines in
{{hashtofield-expand-other}} are expected to behave similarly,
but these should be analyzed on a case-by-case basis.)
Protocols that also use H outside of expand\_message should enforce domain
separation between those uses of H and expand\_message, and should separate
all of these from uses of H outside the protocol.

> The purpose of enforcing domain separation is to ensure that security analyses

Reviewer 2: I think this line could be better sited at the start of the section. 
So, first recalling the objective of domain separation, 
then showing how we achieve this objective _inside_ expand_message,
and then pointing out how others can  _externally_ use H preserving domain separation.

treating different functions based on H as independent random oracles remain
valid even if the same H is used to instantiate these functions.

This section suggests four methods for enforcing domain separation
from expand\_message variants, explains how each method achieves domain
separation, and lists the situations in which each is appropriate.

> Each method is used in a similar way: first, choose a tag DST\_ext

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each method proceeds in a similar way: first, it chooses a tag DST\_ext
```

distinct from DST\_prime, then augment calls to H with this tag.
Note that each method augments calls to H differently, and each may impose
additional requirements on DST\_ext.
These methods can be used to instantiate multiple domain separated functions
(e.g., H1 and H2) by selecting distinct DST\_ext values for each
(e.g., DST\_ext1, DST\_ext2).

> 1.  (Suffix-only domain separation.)

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason for using parentheses?

## Domain separation recommendations {#security-considerations-domain-separation}

The expand\_message variants in this document ({{hashtofield-expand}})
always append a suffix-free-encoded domain separation tag DST\_prime
to the strings hashed by H, the underlying hash or extensible output function.
(Other expand\_message variants that follow the guidelines in
{{hashtofield-expand-other}} are expected to behave similarly,
but these should be analyzed on a case-by-case basis.)
Protocols that also use H outside of expand\_message should enforce domain
separation between those uses of H and expand\_message, and should separate
all of these from uses of H outside the protocol.
The purpose of enforcing domain separation is to ensure that security analyses
treating different functions based on H as independent random oracles remain
valid even if the same H is used to instantiate these functions.

This section suggests four methods for enforcing domain separation
from expand\_message variants, explains how each method achieves domain
separation, and lists the situations in which each is appropriate.
Each method is used in a similar way: first, choose a tag DST\_ext

> distinct from DST\_prime, then augment calls to H with this tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
distinct from DST\_prime and augment calls to H with DST\_ext.
```

> Note that each method augments calls to H differently, and each may impose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each method augments calls to H differently, and each may impose
```

additional requirements on DST\_ext.
These methods can be used to instantiate multiple domain separated functions
(e.g., H1 and H2) by selecting distinct DST\_ext values for each
(e.g., DST\_ext1, DST\_ext2).

1.  (Suffix-only domain separation.)
    This method is useful when domain separating invocations of H
    from expand\_message\_xmd or expand\_message\_xof.
    It is not appropriate for domain separating expand\_message from HMAC-H
    {{RFC2104}}; for that purpose, see method 4.

    To instantiate a suffix-only domain separated function Hso, compute

        Hso(msg) = H(msg || DST_ext)

    DST\_ext should be suffix-free encoded (e.g., by appending one byte

>     encoding the tag's length) to make it infeasible to find distinct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    encoding the length of DST\_ext) to make it infeasible to find distinct
```

    (msg, DST\_ext) pairs that hash to the same value.

    This method ensures domain separation because all distinct invocations of

>     H have distinct suffixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    H have distinct suffixes. Namely, two suffixes are only equal if their length and value is the same, which
    is not possible if DST\_ext is different from DST\_prime.
```

2.  (Prefix-suffix domain separation.)
    This method can be used in the same cases as the suffix-only method.

    To instantiate a prefix-suffix domain separated function Hps, compute

        Hps(msg) = H(DST_ext || msg || I2OSP(0, 1))

    DST\_ext should be prefix-free encoded (e.g., by prepending one byte

>     encoding the tag's length) to make it infeasible to find distinct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    encoding the length of DST\_ext) to make it infeasible to find distinct
```

    (msg, DST\_ext) pairs that hash to the same value.

    This method ensures domain separation because
    appending the byte I2OSP(0, 1) ensures that inputs to H inside Hps

>     are distinct from those inside expand\_message: the final byte of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    are distinct from those inside expand\_message. Specifically, the final byte of
```

    DST\_prime encodes the length of DST, which is required to be nonzero
    ({{domain-separation}}, requirement 2), and DST\_prime is always appended
    to invocations of H inside expand\_message.

3.  (Prefix-only domain separation.)
    This method is only useful for domain separating invocations of H
    from expand\_message\_xmd.

>     It does not give domain separation for expand\_message\_xof or for HMAC-H.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It does not give domain separation for expand\_message\_xof or HMAC-H.
```

    be at least b bits long, where b is the number of bits output by the
    hash function H.
    In addition, at least one of the first b bits must be nonzero.
    Finally, DST\_ext should be prefix-free encoded (e.g., by prepending
    one byte encoding the tag's length) to make it infeasible to
    find distinct (msg, DST\_ext) pairs that hash to the same value.

    This method ensures domain separation as follows.
    First, since DST\_ext contains at least one nonzero bit among its first b bits,
    it is guaranteed to be distinct from the value Z\_pad
    ({{hashtofield-expand-xmd}}, step 4), which ensures that all inputs to H
    are distinct from the input used to generate b\_0 in expand\_message\_xmd.
    Second, since DST\_ext is at least b bits long, it is almost certainly
    distinct from the values b\_0 and strxor(b\_0, b\_(i - 1)), and therefore
    all inputs to H are distinct from the inputs used to generate b\_i, i >= 1,
    with high probability.

4.  (XMD-HMAC domain separation.)
    This method is useful for domain separating invocations of H inside
    HMAC-H (i.e., HMAC {{RFC2104}} instantiated with hash function H) from
    expand\_message\_xmd.

>     This is useful when HMAC-H is used with a non-secret key to

Reviewer: Should we note something about HMAC-H when used with a secret key? (HPKE, for example, assumes HMAC is indifferentiable from a RO.)
